---
title: "Creating a theme"
description: "Tips for theme creation."
date: "August 23, 2013"
author: "Nathan Bugbee"
layout: "blog"
---

<article>

{$page.description}

* **Selecting a theme**: Choose a theme that you can get excited about. Take the time to find one that is both challenging, but isn't over your head. This will make the whole theme building process more interesting and exciting for you.
* **Follow the directions**: Directions are laid out on the [Liferay Developer Network](https://dev.liferay.com/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/7-0/themes-and-layout-templates). If there is an existing Liferay theme that has similar features to the theme you want to create, set that existing theme as the *base theme* for your the one that you are going to be creating. *Note: You will, most likely, not be using Liferay IDE to create your theme, so follow the directions that correspond to using the terminal.*
* **Formatting Standards**: Reference the standards used by the [Liferay frontend source formatter](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-frontend-source-formatter) as you create your source files. This will save you from making a lot of obvious mistakes.  You will also want to review your code with these standards in mind before submitting it (i.e. sending a pull request) to your reviewer.
* **CSS**: Liferay uses [Clay](https://liferay.github.io/clay), [SASS](http://sass-lang.com/) and [Bourbon](https://www.bourbon.io) for its CSS. Familiarize yourself with these technologies after you have a general grasp on CSS. When writing your ```_custom.scss``` use the other themes as an example.
* **_custom.scss**: Only edit the ```_custom.scss``` file in the ```src``` folder for **ALL** of your CSS. When you create your theme, there will be other categorized CSS files that will be autogenerated in the build folder (e.g. ```layout.css```, ```portlet.css```, etc.).
* **Use DevTools**: Use Devtools to fiddle with the CSS in your browser. It is much quicker than editing in the source files if you want to test simple changes or additions without waiting for the theme to redeploy.
* **Restyle portlets**: When you create your theme, you will likely need to restyle certain portlets (e.g. the login portlet or the search portlet). Each portlet has an unique ID or CSS class that you can use to specifically apply styles in your ```custom.css``` file.
* **Layout Templates**: Do not shy away from creating your own layouts. Don't try to simulate your desired layout using the *Nested Portlets* portlet. Creating your own layout is relatively simple, though it may be intimidating at first because you are required to work with an unfamiliar language (i.e. Freemarker). It may be helpful to think of Freemarker as HTML remixed and souped-up.
* **Format your code as you write**: When writing code, it is tempting to just get all the code written down, and then go back and format it later. If you can, avoid doing this. It requires a little more work up-front to keep your code neat as you go along, but it saves a ton of time in the long run.

</article>